we're 1610 patients in either critical
or intensive care and this number two is
decreased every day for the past six
days ventilator use currently stands at
one thousand one hundred and eighty nine
the lowest that's been Judy I think in
over a month
there were three hundred sixty two new
hospitalizations yesterday and on
discharges three hundred and thirty-five
live patients were released from our
hospitals yesterday our hospitals
continue to show the positive trends we
want and need to see if we are to get
ourselves in a steady position to get on
the road back in toward the responsible
restart of our economy
these numbers are beginning to become
the underpinnings of our overarching
ideals that Public Health creates
economic health and that data determines
dates unfortunately even with these
positive trends we are seeing we
continue to lose too many residents to
Cove in nineteen and with the heaviest
of hearts we report forty-five
additional deaths from among our New
Jersey family again however this number
is likely lower as a result of the
network outage we had yesterday
but either way there are forty five
precious lives our statewide total is
seven thousand nine hundred and ten
kovat nineteen doesn't care who it takes
our losses mirror our diversity and
today we remember three more who have
been taken from our New Jersey family
this is Michael Connors senior he had
three loves family cars and work at
first his love of cars led to a career
as an auto mechanic in Newark but while
there he made numerous friends within
the Newark Police Department and with
their encouragement he ultimately joined
their ranks in 1993 it proudly served
the people of Newark as a police officer
for 26 years kovat 19 claimed him just
this past Thursday and Michael was only
58 his family says he'll be forever
remembered for his work ethic dedication
wit and fun-loving presence Michael
leaves his daughter Dorothy with whom I
had the honor of speaking yesterday
afternoon two sons Michael jr. and
Damien
his adopted daughter Samia as well as
seven grandchildren and a committed
companion Tiffany Parham and many other
relatives and friends on behalf of our
state we thank him for his selfless
service and we keep the whole Connors
family in his memory in our prayers Luis
Fernando Miranda there he is he came to
the United States from Colombia in
Medina when he was 22 years old he lived
in Secaucus and was a long-term longtime
employee of NJ Transit in New York
Waterway before that taking pride in his
work in and helping get people to where
they needed to go and he was one of
those who helped pilot the fairies that
shuttled residents back home across the
Hudson River on 9/11 throughout this
current emergency he continued serving
his passengers as a bus operator for NJ
Transit right until kovin 19 took him to
he was planning to retire literally next
year and he turned 63 just two weeks ago
he will be remembered by his family
friends and co-workers for his smile his
laugh in his willingness to always lend
a hand or help others he has survived by
two children one of whom is his daughter
who was serving in the United States
military as we speak two brothers three
sisters nieces and nephews I have the
great honor to speak to one of his
nieces Kathleen Bedoya from Montclair
yesterday and we reviewed Lewis's
extraordinary life and he leaves behind
a transit family that will not ever
forget his dedication to service and
finally we remember George Anthony Caius
of Richfield in Bergen County he was
known affectionately as Georgie it was
only 27 years old when he passed on
Friday Georgie had Down syndrome and
while he could not communicate verbally
he would always show his love by
showering the people he knew with hugs
and kisses he loved music and took
special joy in watching his sister's
dance recitals where he would get lost
in the
he also loved to eat and his mob said
the best Christmas present she could
give him would be a rump roast my kind
of guy
he loves Sesame Street's Elmo and
Disney's Mickey Mouse - as you could see
and he even had the chance to meet the
Meccan he brought joy to his family and
everyone he touched Georgie is survived
by his parents Anna I spoke with his mom
yesterday and that was as tough as it
gets as you can imagine his dad burnout
Bernardo his sister Alexandra both of
his grandmother's and many more aunts
uncles and cousins and by the way beyond
the tragedy of Georgie's passing which
is unspeakable there's been a lot of
challenges in that household including
one of his grandmother's having a stroke
on Valentine's Day so they've been
dealing not only with the with the
awfulness of covin 19 and losing Georgie
but also other health care challenges
he was a special by every measure and
bright spirit and he was taken from us
all too soon may God bless the memory of
that guy and may his memory bless all of
us these are the faces some of the faces
that covet nineteen is taken they are
among the thousands of names that we
will remember and they are the people
for whom we will continue our work to
defeat this virus it's why we will keep
up with our social distancing even when
we begin the process of restart and
recovering this weekend we saw that so
many of you understand how this works
and we thank you for keeping your
distances and please your face coverings
we need to see more of them by the way
even when you didn't want to do either
of those but there are others who went
to our parks are headed into downtown
streets who need to be reminded why we
should be wearing face coverings and
staying away from each other and for
whom we need to be role models social
distancing right now is the only proven
kovat 19 prevention I would add face
masks to that there are no recognized
treatments yet and there is no cure
there's no vaccine yet there is only
social distancing and a face covering is
about
you if you were a symptomatic lowering
your chances of spreading the virus to
others that covering blocks you from
potentially sending infected droplets
into the air to impact others including
potentially your loved ones so again
thank you for what was overall a very
positive weekend now let's step it up
let's keep it up and together we will
win this this morning I want to say that
we had a the first meeting of our
reopening and recovery commission and it
was Judy and I were on it along with
others of our team I thought it was an
excellent discussion
it's an extraordinary group of people
and on that call chaired by by the way
president emeritus of Princeton
University Shirley Tilghman and CEO of
Merck & Co Ken Frazier on that call we
we announced and will give more color on
this as we go forward that will be
forming other councils to advise as much
closer to the ground much more in state
we've heard from a lot of you that they
respect enormous ly the talent that we
have collected from all perspectives in
both sides of the aisle in this recovery
and reopening Commission but we also
need tactical very close to the ground
help and we'll be forming councils in
that respect as well finally I want to
give a couple of well-deserved shoutouts
to some folks around the state who have
similarly stepped up during this
emergency first I want to give a huge
thanks to the palestinian-american
Community Center in Clifton which has
been working throughout this emergency
to support its entire community the PAC
as it's known has always been an active
organization and they've kicked into
overdrive delivering 400 meals Monday to
Friday to families in their area and
distributing 400 food baskets to
hospitals and senior citizen centers and
to police firefighters and EMTs the pack
has distributed as well 15,000 masks
50,000 pairs of gloves 1,200 cans of
disinfectant spray and a thousand
bottles of hand sanitizer it's been
holding regular webinars to keep the
community informed about kovin 19
and how we could defeat it our state's
greatest strength is our tremendous
diversity we are truly one big family
pulling together so to everyone at the
PAC New Jersey thanks you and finally we
want to give a shout out to colleagues
Woods callings Woods Patrick
Rodeo who yesterday ran 20-point 20
miles to raise money to pay for high
school yearbooks for students who cannot
afford them on their own from his run
through night park yesterday he raised
more than three thousand dollars given
today's announcement about schools in
this school year this act takes on
greater meaning for some students and
Collingswood the yearbook will be there
bank of memories of a school year that
was unlike any other because of Patrick
they'll now be able to hold those
memories
so do you pat Collingswood and new
jersey we thank you and with that I will
turn things over to the woman who needs
no introduction please help me welcome
the Commissioner of the Department of
Health Judy personally Thank You
governor and good afternoon I'm really
pleased today to remind everyone that
today is this week is National Nurses
Week at the time it's time to pay
tribute kind of a tribute to and thanked
New Jersey's 170,000 nurses for the work
that they do every day to protect and
save lives they are caring for kovat 19
patients and our hospitals our critical
care units our field medical stations
and our alternative care sites they are
assisting the residents of our state
psychiatric hospitals our nursing homes
and assisted living facilities they are
working at our testing sites and they
are helping our local health departments
the work they've been performing has
been challenging to say the least as a
nurse I do know that it's one of the
hardest jobs and their bravery and
services during this time has
demonstrated that there is nothing that
will hold them back from saving lives in
new
Jerzy they run into the fire not away
from it
this year's theme of National Nurses
Week is compassion expertise and trust
people
just trust nurses they are part of the
heart and soul of our health care system
so when you see a nurse do me a favor do
them a favor and say thank you thank you
to them for all the work that they do
last evening our hospitals reported five
thousand two hundred and eighty seven
hospitalizations of kovat nineteen
individuals this number as the governor
has reported is on a steady decline
there are 1610 individuals in critical
care seventy four percent of those
patients are on ventilators
significantly down from that high of 97
percent two weeks ago two hospitals in
the central region were on divert status
last evening no hospitals in the south
or the north three hundred ninety five
individuals have been treated in our
field medical stations and our hotel in
Secaucus is currently reporting 64
deaths
yes excuse me nineteen healthcare
workers and forty-five patients have
been discharged from those centers and
they've served a total of a hundred
individuals at the Secaucus hotel today
we're reporting 1621 new cases for a
total of a hundred and twenty eight
thousand two hundred and 669 total cases
we are reporting forty-five additional
deaths as the governor reported we did
have a network outage yesterday so we
are certain that that these numbers are
underreported but for the information we
have right now the breakdown of deaths
by race and ethnicity is as follows
white 52.5 black 19.5 hispanic 17.3
asian 5.3 and other 5.5 there are now
508 long term care facilities in the
state were reporting kovat 19 cases at
the state veterans homes among a census
of 680 to
veterans there have been 360 residents
testing positive for kovat 19 and a
total of a hundred and twenty-three
deaths at our state psychiatric
hospitals were the census of one
thousand two hundred and fifty one
hundred and sixty three patients have
tested positive and there have been ten
deaths that is similar to what I
reported last week according to the lab
data that we have we have tested two
hundred forty-eight thousand three
hundred and nineteen individuals ninety
nine thousand three hundred and sixty
eight tested positive for a current
positivity rate of forty point zero two
percent so that concludes my daily
report again please continue to follow
social distancing guidelines it
definitely is making a difference stay
connected stay safe and stay healthy
thank you Judy thank you and here's
again to the nurses in our state how
many of you say hundred seventy-five
thousand hundred seventy thousand
hundred and seventy thousand of which
you are among its ranks bless you and
thank you for your leadership
obviously reporting a lot today by the
way this that the top six counties
remain in terms of positives as they
have been I don't think the overnight
we're not as confident in the overnight
data so I won't spend any time on that
positivity again continues to drift down
in his ed reminds us that's a cumulative
number the spot number is invariably
going to be lower and again remind
everybody we have a disproportionate
amount of symptomatic folks in that that
won't always be the case in fact I bet
you not that long from now that will
decidedly not be the case but it is
still for the moment it's so that number
going down is a positive measure by any
light obviously a big announcement on
education today police only welcomed a
great leader in that respect and in so
many the Commission or the Department of
Education dr. Lamont epaulette thank you
I am also proud to announce that this
week is a designated teacher
appreciation week so happy happy teacher
appreciation week to all the educators
out there
Thank You governor Murphy and
Commissioner Percy jelly to say that
this is not an easy decision is an
understatement but as governor
Murphy reminds us we must be guided by
science and the facts on the ground I
thank you governor for prioritizing the
health and safety of our students
educators and families here in New
Jersey
twelve of our parents whose homes have
turned into classrooms to all of our
teachers who've pivoted to remote
instruction overnight to all of our
school district and school district and
leaders working around the clock to
ensure that students of diverse needs
are being met I am in all of your
ability to adapt and tremendously proud
and impressed at how you continue to
address complex challenges we do not
take your work and sacrifice for granted
today the announcement that New Jersey
schools will be closed to students for
the remainder of the year will
undoubtedly raise questions and concerns
I am dedicating every resources at my
disposal to answer those questions and
to quickly as we can and to ensure that
we give our educators the information
and flexibility needed to uplift our
students during this unprecedented times
in the weeks leading up to governor
Murphy's order to close elementary
schools and secondary schools the
Department of Education requires school
districts to develop emergency
preparedness plans that address critical
areas such as delivery of remote
instruction special education services
and food security given the speed at
which schools have transitioned to
remote learning and the rapidly changing
public health landscape in our state
districts have continuously revised
plans in response to these changing
conditions this announcement will
undoubtedly require the districts to
revise those plans once again and to
ensure continuity of these key services
through the end of the school year my
team will continue to take a
boots-on-the-ground approach to support
local school districts as they rise to
that challenge and take obstacles none
of us could have envisioned when we set
out to be educators the department is
also looking forward to the future to
explore what some are instruction and
the next school year school year may
look like for New Jersey schools and
students to that end we are creating a
steering committee of diverse
stakeholders to help us navigate these
issues
our guiding policy principle to this
work is that each local community knows
that their students best and our job is
to provide every flexibility we can to
unlock district innovation and to
provide for their students during these
extraordinary times while also putting
God Wells in place to uphold our high
quality and equitable educational system
I know however that this work goes
beyond plans and resources as the father
of a daughter who is graduating from
high school this spring the personal
impact of this decision hits home for me
to parents of graduating seniors please
know that I stand with you and commit to
finding ways to honor our graduates and
celebrate the incredible resilience of
the class of 2020 districts are working
on a wide variety of innovative plans
for alternative graduation ceremonies
proms and other traditional envious
celebrations my team of the Department
of Education is committed to helping
each district find solutions uniquely
tailored to the needs and priorities of
their local communities we recognize
that and our work to honor students it
is critical that we elevate their voices
and let their passion and innovative
thinking inform decisions that impact
the most when we get through this and as
the governor always remind us we will
get through this
our young people are poised to inherit
our post covert world and we must
empower them to carve the pathways that
get us there we have been working to tap
the federal funding that can help
provide schools with the resource they
need to deliver a remote instruction
deep-cleaning school building and
address the emotional needs of students
to that end the department recently
applied for 310 million dollars in
federal funding through the Elementary
and Secondary School emergency relief
fund which is part of the cares Act this
funding can be provided for important
initiatives such as purchasing
technology purchasing supplies to clean
and sanitize schools mental health
supports activities related to summer
learning and supplemental after-school
programs which can include online
learning during the summer to address
the needs of subgroups of students
providing school leaders with resources
to address the needs of their schools
and activities to address the unique
needs of subgroups of students
coordinating the distribution of Mills
tell us what students it is important to
know that school districts will have a
great deal of local discretion and how
they use these funds to best benefit
their students finally I would like to
express my gratitude to governor Murphy
as always for his leadership
unprecedented times calls for
unprecedented acts of leadership in
humanity we're in total totally
uncharted waters facing the kinds of
decisions and challenges we never
imagined and you continue governor to
make those tough choices to protect New
Jersey students and educators thank you
as always for your resolute leadership
wells Lamont thank you for yours as well
and I know this was not an easy call for
you for Judy for me for any of us
including at a very personal level as
you point out you got a high school
senior in your your house and and I've
taken an enormous amount of and I know
you have as well we all have input and
in Cummings from parents and educators
and kids themselves and particular
sympathy and deep sympathy for the
seniors and I'd say yet again the
seniors who participate in something
after school particularly sports it's
not what any of us signed up for and so
it's with a in some respects a heavy
heart but this we have no choice on this
this is not a decision that's been made
based on emotions this is based on the
hard science and so thank you for your
leadership at every step of the way
Lamont deep appreciation before we throw
it to questions I'm going to ask you
each to keep it to one or two each
because we're up against it a little bit
and I apologize for that
we're normally more expensive but we're
on the clock today Pat Callahan thank
you for your leadership anything you got
on compliance in particular compliance
today I think this is on everyone's mind
compliance PPE infrastructure other
matters thank you Thank You governor
good afternoon y'all start with the
weekend with regards to the parks
certainly overwhelming compliance there
we had chief Amanda Smith who's the
chief of police for the Park Police
under DEP was in direct contact with the
rock over the weekend although they hit
capacity
the early as the governor said really no
yo violations issued there a few parking
summonses for those folks who parked
outside where they shouldn't once the
parking lot was full but really
overwhelming compliance the shore towns
saw an influx of both vehicular and foot
traffic there was a few extra drawbridge
openings I know in Sea Bright which
caused a little bit of traffic because
the recreational boating was was kind of
through the roof
I also had a call yesterday morning with
all police chiefs from the entire state
and again from from Sussex to Cape May
just overwhelming compliance on what
everybody knows were two gorgeous days
with regards to the EO violations newark
issued 210 and closed 17 businesses and
Elizabeth home owner was cited for
having more than ten subjects at his
house for a party in Bridgewater a woman
who was in a rehab rehabilitation
facility refused commands by the nurses
to get back to the Kovan floor for
cohorting and she spit on her hands and
and wiped the medical equipment with the
saliva that she had spit in East Hanover
an employee at a gas station was cited
for not wearing a mask and social
distancing and that all of a subject was
cited for being at a closed basketball
court in Paterson the subject was cited
for an EO violation for not wearing a
mass and not social distancing Patterson
store owner was cited for the second
time for having a non-essential
furniture store open Rahway a subject
two subjects were cited for having a
large party East Orange subject to
subject cited for failure to socially
distance and Rozelle a non-essential
beauty supply store owner was cited in
North Bergen non-essential business a
car wash was cited detail of vehicle
detail and in Secaucus a subject who was
initially arrested for shoplifting at a
home depot stated to have coronavirus
and coughed on the officers involved but
again for two beautiful days
overwhelming compliance I think as the
governor said leads us to hopefully that
continues and we are monitoring it as we
move forward and I will just close with
saying god bless all our nurses thanks
go
god bless our nurses and our teachers I
got I got both sides of me here Pat
thank you and again deep appreciation to
everybody out there who really did the
right thing and we saw I saw with my own
eyes and all of us were anecdotally
Department of Environmental Protection
Commissioner Katherine McCabe I want to
give a big shout out she and I spoke on
Saturday night we exchanged last night
her people were out there Pat's folks
were out there as I mentioned earlier in
my County counties up and down the state
we're really doing the right thing and
most importantly you all were doing the
right thing we got to come back to you
on masks I'm a big believer that that's
something we need to be more I'm not
gonna use the word forceful but that's a
that's a game changer and again the
faster we break the back of this sucker
the faster we'll be able to get back
into business but I will say this the
overwhelmingly good compliant behavior I
mentioned on on I think Thursday and
Friday and I know on Saturday that the
behavior that you all showed everybody
this weekend is going to give us more
degrees of freedom
in terms of decisions that are not just
outdoor decisions but also other
decisions down the road most importantly
because by through that behavior the
curves continue to come down I was
criticized by someone a legislator for
use of the word knucklehead so I looked
it up for myself and I in in the
definition is a stupid bumbling inept
person which i think is quite consultor
respect quite consistent with some of
the behavior Martell we're gonna start
over here with some of the behavior Pat
that you have highlighted but I was
given two alternatives to consider not
by that person by the way a blockhead or
numbskull
I like knucklehead because I think it's
we started there it's got three
syllables it's got a little bit more
umph but but
to the legislator who raised that that's
the point that's the point
overwhelmingly folks are doing the right
things but for the very small minority
who are not they they need to be called
out that's why we're doing it so hats
off to everybody out there it's so
impressive on the compliance again we're
gonna ask you to keep this short John
welcome back we're gonna start with you
hold on one second there we go
this cuartel thank you you're gonna be
with our mic today the schools order is
it talk about colleges and universities
daycare centers how are they fitting
into this what metrics will you be using
to think about September reopening and
can you talk about how the reopening of
schools is linked to the general
reopening of businesses in the state in
general and on borrowing is this the Fed
bill you're talking about borrowing or
is it new market borrowing to do
short-term expenses so the borrowing is
the Fed for the time being because the
private markets are not hospitable at
the moment to say the waist even though
the equity market shows sort of these
bounces one day to the next
nothing new to report on day care to the
best of my knowledge or higher ed is
that correct math day cares will
continue to operate under executive
order 110 which has the emergency day
care system and just on the bill itself
it is both private and Fed borrowing and
metrics bear with us on that Lamont
mention as did I that there's going to
be an enormous amount of stakeholder
engagement including what the summer
might look like in terms of enrichment
opportunities etc so bear with us on
that we're gonna go to the back and then
we'll come down actually Michael I
didn't see you there so we'll start here
go to Mike and then come down please
good afternoon governor what would you
have needed to have seen in the data in
order to be confident in opening schools
again why didn't you decide to kind of
go this route to ultimately what didn't
you see I'm second graduation will be
allowed to continue to some degree what
creative ways have you already discussed
and what's kind of feasible at this
point and just third how does the
current financial situation impact state
aid any update on that impact what sorry
impact state aid how much schools are
getting yeah so to be determined on the
on the on the last question but
everything will get
crushed and I'm more worried right now
about manpower and state aid in fact
it's an indirect has an indirect impact
on manpower within our education system
I'll ask either Lamont or Judy because
they were deeply involved on this
ungraduated bear with me on that we're
trying to figure out some ways you know
everything from virtual stuff all the
way toward something down the road
depending on if the virus please God
we get this thing to go away we could
find a way to celebrate maybe in some
social distancing compliant way going
forward but we're there's a lot of good
thought being put into something on
graduation because we owe it to the
seniors to give them a tip of the tip of
the cap I would just say the NJ s IAA
I think even though that was directed at
sports I think you can make that
statement more broadly you've got a
balance of the school year beyond May
15th of what looks like about five weeks
for most schools I think Lamont and
you've got you've got real health care
issues and what we would need to prepare
to make that school reality compliant
with social distancing we don't have
therapeutics or a vaccine we've got big
intergenerational concerns even though
this has been very benign with kids we I
think the experts to my right would
suggest that there's unwitting
asymptomatic passage of this that we
don't any of us have our arms around yet
and so for all of the above reasons it
felt like a bridge too far I believe
this is true and Matt may correct me if
I'm wrong here or Mon who's been
studying this I believe we're state
number 46 to close for the balance of
the year it was 43 on Thursday New York
has that's all right Lamont New York is
now shut for the balance remote only
Connecticut I believe is doing something
similar so we're not exactly George
Washington here but we did want to give
this every shot
we could in particular for the seniors
and it just feels like a bridge too far
anything you want to add to this LeMond
microphone think the governor's correct
I think we need to get more information
on social distancing I think as they
provide the standard of minimum
guidelines that we have so right now
there has been as governor mentioned
there's been a variety of ideas tossed
out whether it's to have the virtue have
a graduation in August to have virtual
graduations I think it's more of an
individualized decision however we're
going to continue to work with the
Department of Health to really kind of
ascertain more standards I think for
opening schools or doing anything has to
do with social distancing if we think
there's something fun we could do at a
state level sign us up that that's
that's help healthy and complaint
anything you want to add on schools I
mean yeah I think we have to realize and
I get these questions as well it doesn't
seem like children are getting hit it's
hard but they can still be carriers and
I think you mentioned the
intergenerational homes and we have to
we have to be concerned about
safeguarding everyone so you know
another five weeks does not seem like a
to do that and it's stretched too far
when you're balancing that with the risk
of more people getting contacted with
kovat positive individuals and we're
looking at the epidemiology every day we
track new kovat cases cumulative cases
hospitalizations of Kovach 19 patients
hospitalizations into critical care
overall hospital availability so we're
tracking the the extent of the disease
every day and although we see it coming
down we still have over 5,000
individuals in our hospitals ill enough
to be hospitalized with koban 19 if you
and by the way I read Jersey papers
every day so don't be offended by my
sighting in New York paper and I'm
probably the last person who reads and
actually Judy and I establish were the
last two people who read a physical
print version but above the fold New
York Times today if you haven't read it
why does covet hit you where where does
it hit why does it hit the amount of
unknown and open questions particular
the epidemiological front and sorry to
practice without a license is long this
is among experts and so the the view
that we have taken if one one other way
to put it is we're gonna know a lot more
a month from now two months from now
three months from now than we know today
inevitably please question about access
to technology for education we've heard
from some families even if they have
received a computer from their district
they have multiple kids at home and
they're having to share any plans to
quickly resolve that I understand that
with the federal aid that can pay for
some of that but how quickly do you
think that that might come through and
in terms of requirements to move ahead
to the next grade will any of those
requirements be relaxed or adjusted
because of this situation to move up
Lamont do you want to hit both of those
the federal money that you talked about
you and I talked about as part of the
part of the technology reason answer I
think right well I'm proud to say that
the I guess the number of districts of
students that did not have access to
technology had decreased about 15,000 so
districts are every day working on it
using their federal funds they currently
have title ones funds using their
general funds that they have knowing the
fact that they can get money from the
care Zak allows them now to spend money
because as the governor said this is the
rainy day so they are preparing for that
so we're very encouraged to see that
that that digital divide will be
lessened as we move towards to September
and because it was the second question
requirements any loosening or yes so
we're currently working with a districts
right now to put some guidelines I mean
and so people think and ask why are we
giving our directors because there's
individual districts and there's
different needs different grading
policies that they have with their own
policies and regulations within their
district so we're doing right now is
just having communication and
conversation with them to really kind of
come up with a concrete guideline set
you know because some district you don't
pass fell some districts don't alphabet
some district and whatever their their
board policy states and regards to their
retention that's what they're gonna
follow but we we encouraged you really
worked with them was to provide
guidelines guidelines thank you
let's go is that Mike is that you I
can't even see you there behind that
mask
go ahead thanks governor good afternoon
I wonder with summer coming up what you
can say the state will do about beaches
that
try to restrict their access to
residents only and with school staying
closed now is it safe to assume that
casinos will also be closed at least in
through June 30th or have you made a
decision about casinos at this point was
that implying that some the correlation
between whether our kids are at school
or casinos unintentionally if it's um
I'm not a lawyer I'm gonna practice
without a license I said this I believe
last week so this is not my call this is
a legal call I believe communities
cannot restrict are not allowed legally
to restrict to just their residents is
that correct Matt yeah that is he's
giving me the nod but as a general
matter notwithstanding a beach decision
maybe a local decision bear with us
because we think some guidance may make
sense here in fact we're certain will
make sense we're encouraged by the
compliance in the over the weekend with
with the state and county parks that's a
good thing one of the particular
striking elements in seeing it with my
own eyes and Pat refer to this as well
was limiting parking to 50 percent as an
example that may well be a smart as
folks as communities think about how
many day tickets or monthly passes
they're gonna sell maybe there's
something on the capacity side that
speaks to that but bear with us on that
we we're not we're not making any news
today on beaches yet but we do think
some general guidance even though the
decision may be local with the exception
of say Island Beach State Park which is
the States we think some guidance is in
order so bear with us and nothing new on
casinos I think you know we we have to
we have sort of a ring of decisions to
make and out-of-doors decisions to us at
least feel like they're in the early
stages of decisions we can make
indoor compact we're all aggregated
together decisions are going to be more
difficult to make let's go out we'll do
Nikita's at you and then we'll come down
to Dave and go back at Ian please hi
governor so I just have a couple of
questions about the R&R Commission can
you either speak up or get closer
sure Marcel so I have a couple of
questions about the R&R Commission are
its members going to be required to file
financial disclosures and will they be
given government emails and regardless
of the answer to that last one will
communications that they send on
personal lines like cell phones be
subject to disclosure under Oprah is
that it I've no idea do you want in
because it's an ad-hoc Commission that
is created by the governor these are the
Commission members are serving in their
personal capacities they're not subject
to the same ethics and disclosure laws
and there's a long history of this we
can walk you through it offline Nikita
they're also not being compensated as
we've said before so just they will
follow any recusal policies that we have
with respect to their own personal
conflicts and we've walked each one of
them through any potential conflicts
thank you hey Dave hi governor so on the
fiscal disaster that you were talking
about you'd mentioned you're vetoing
bills which ones are you beat vetoing
how likely do you think we'll have
layoffs and what kinds of state programs
do you think will be eliminated or cut
back significantly and then on the whole
issue of schools I know the Commissioner
mentioned there's a committee that's
being put together or has been put
together to look at metrics about
reopening summer school possibly and
then obviously in the fall and you had
mentioned governor you know to be stay
tuned we'll give you more details could
you talk a maybe just in general terms
about the kinds of stuff you're going to
be looking at because you've got
classrooms
school buses lunchroom especially
younger kids you know fighting pulling
masks so off each other that's going to
be rough I would think on the vetoes
we'll come back to you with the specific
list but they they fall into a couple of
categories Dave one is which i think is
the biggest number bills that had been
introduced and subsequently there have
been cleanup bills that I've already
signed so that these were no longer the
gating
we had already we had already worked
with the legislature to clean it up
secondly second category would be some
bills where we believe the feds either
are or will fund as an example Lamont
referenced the cares Act that we can get
the money out of the feds so that we
don't need to spend our precious
remaining coins third category would be
it's a noble notion but we can't
possibly execute on it fast enough to
deal with the crisis before us so you
know in other words it's a good idea but
it is we it's gonna take too long to
execute to address the here-and-now
challenge that it was intended for and
then the last category and there are
only a couple but then i and i don't
make a lot of us we just don't have the
money so they're they're completely
well-intentioned in a normal time up and
you know normal time up until a few
months ago these are things that we
would have clearly entertained but we
just don't have the shekels right now to
do that i can't give you any more color
on eliminations cutbacks layoffs but
they will be large-scale I just don't
I'm not saying that with any joy we will
have no choice and again I pray that
both we get very good interpretation on
the cares Act which we may get later on
today that's a that's important piece
that we get a big bucket of federal
direct cash assistance through Congress
and a bill signed by the president and
thirdly that we get the flexibility to
borrow which we need our legislature to
help us get there that's an important
again you don't wake up every day
particularly to look at the two years
our first two-plus years in office we
were managing aggressively facted we got
elected in part to do that to a managed
aggressively structural deficits but we
got no choice at the moment and Aleman
i'm not sure if you want to add any in
terms of the deliberations you'll be
expecting so as a member of the Council
of Chief state chief state school
officers all the commissioners to have
to come
there's a framework they put for best
practices and guidelines we'll be
working off that framework and really
kind of flushing it out more and making
tailor to New Jersey those guidelines
one is continued continuity of learning
which is reopening schools including
summer learning conditions for learnings
somewhat the safety leadership and
planning and policy and funding so those
are the four areas broad areas that
we'll be looking at using that framework
that's predicated on best practices
that's also part of the consortium of
Commissioners throughout the country
Thank You Martellus it in here governor
while the portion of our student
population has adapted to schooling
remotely online are you concerned about
the estimated 90,000 children in the
state with no internet access at home
what will New Jersey do to keep these
kids from falling behind Commissioner
Percy Kelly how soon can New Jersey
start asymptomatic testing for residents
to get a clearer picture of how the
virus is spread and why aren't all the
residents and staff at Andover subacute
getting tested after it's become clear
the virus was prevalent there and when
is the official report on the
investigation they are going to get
released finally what percent of the
total deaths reported are attributed to
long-term care facilities thank you
I think Lamont is acutely concerned
about folks I think we've addressed this
but from day one I know I am and I know
he is concerned about you know we
deliberately took recognizing we have
over 600 school districts we took
deliberately a couple more days to bring
this to a close to go remote only in
part due to food security remote remote
learning generally and specifically
access to devices that's why as an
example you had the 30 day in advance
print the print the school program out
that Lamont had worked through with a
variety of the of the districts so this
is a particular this is not ideal that
is not ideal I don't want anyone to
think that we think this is a ideal
State we're trying to keep as many
people alive
as well as push forward the great public
education system do you want to comment
on that for a second before we go to
those yes guv we've been tracking this
data as the governor mentioned from day
one we currently have approximately in
the public school system 1.4 million
students we've surveyed our over five
hundred twenty-something Plus districts
and of that survey we've been monitoring
that and districts have been updating
their mergency plans and we've noticed
there's been a decrease and the number
of students that don't do not have
technology so currently right now we're
looking at approximately close to ninety
thousand students out of 1.4 million
students in the juries that do not have
access to Internet access also
technology so districts are now working
on that because that's now becoming a
new reality as we look to the future we
don't know we do not know what it looks
like and regardless of social distancing
so districts are using the federal funds
and they're going to anticipate the gift
from the cares Act they use entitle
funds that currently have and you're
also looking at general funds to make
sure that those basic needs of our
students are being met so they become
kind of a basic need I would just say on
testing Judy I'll turn it to you but we
finally as of the end of the week I
guess toward the weekend we have the raw
materials that we needed to be able to
at least double our testing capacity we
have other allies in the fight Rutgers
let's give them another shoutout we are
right now and I know Judy and her team
are leading this going through the sort
of the the rankings of where we're going
to deploy those resources that's being
developed as we speak
communities of particular exposure I
think are our highest we've said this
already our highest priority so the most
vulnerable communities among us so
that's as with homes homes for
developmentally disabled Corrections
system as well as densely populated
areas the notion of mobile vans in our
biggest urban centers so we're so again
going through a rings of priorities but
Judy I'll turn it to you to clean clean
up and give this the the answer it
deserves oK we've identified vulnerable
populations here's a partial list
Department of
directions will be starting to do
universal testing there the veterans
homes there has been Universal testing
what we mean by that is all of the
residents and all of the employees the
development adult developmentally
disabled homes have been through
Universal testing long-term care
facilities we're continuing a wide-scale
plan identifying those long-term care
facilities who have the most opportunity
to cohort negative individuals in other
words they have a lower incidence right
now and that will be brought through the
state and I and I have to give a shout
out to a number of our healthcare
facilities our hospitals are helping us
with that program which I'll be able to
give you more information fully tomorrow
seasonal workers we have a task force in
place in including our FQHCs in the
south to help us with seasonal workers
we expect 12 to 15,000 that they come in
every year they work on the farms in the
South we'll be working with the growers
to make sure that we have full testing
and follow-up in isolation and
Quarantine for all of these and lastly
the inner city or populations that
cannot go to drive through or and do not
have walk up possibilities we're looking
at releasing vans into those communities
to increase testing and it would be
primarily asymptomatic individuals those
that first and foremost have had contact
with a positive kovat 19 patient
individual did you hit long-term care
long-term care overall we have a
complete plan for what what's the
question so number number of fatalities
yeah I was looking do you have that I
think that right around a third of all
associated deaths confirmed that are
associated with long-term care
facilities thank you
do you have one in the back like I can
barely see you that's more my eyesight
Thank You governor
well the Department of Education require
the equivalent of a minimum of 180 days
of class instruction remotely are
offered districts more flexibility on
that and then add equity for children
and free and reduced lunch programs
there's really a wide range of
interpretations of the March legislation
on feeding these students some kids are
being given fresh food they picked up
every day or every other day while
others are being given a weeks or a
month worth of processed food and boxes
are you sure you in any detailed
guidance and how districts should carry
out free and reduced lunch programs for
the remainder of the school year thank
you well not do you want to hit that the
I guess the first question is any change
to 180 day minimum requirement and
secondly any color on the free and
reduced lunch guidance which I guess the
question is it's being interpreted
broadly whether it's intended that way
or not as is a question please Emma
Garson haja needed a statute that is law
and we have not we will continue to hold
to the hundred eighty day statue until
the governor deems otherwise as far as
the the food and in males in the summer
we have been tracking and working with
them however we are working in close
collaboration with the Agriculture
Department of Agriculture and also the
guidelines so the districts are
following the guidelines prescribed by
the US Department of Agriculture as well
as our state agricultural program we've
we've actually observed over 200 mill
sites just to make sure that a that
they're doing what is right and they're
following those guidelines but secondly
are they here in to social distance and
safety rules so yes they are mean the
minimum standards and regard state needs
as you said before each district is
different based off of their needs one
thing I would say is if afterward you
think there's a particular example of a
district that is not complying and that
you've heard about we'd love to know
what that is and we can get you offline
if that's okay thank you
sir do you have anything no sir how are
you
Thank You governor if businesses like
supermarkets and liquor stores can
implement social distancing guidelines
and remain open why can't other
businesses use
similar protocols for example if a small
retail store could only allow one person
at a time why not let them open and on
the unemployment front over the weekend
people were having trouble accessing the
website what do you say to people who
need that money but can't access on the
first question is that's that's not a
long list of things for us to be which
we constantly do consider and observe
again remember the the core mantra so
far is stay at home and so then we've
said ok on what basis can you go out
reasonably in the parks let's put aside
supermarkets and pharmacies and etc
which will make sense and we've talked
about and we expect those organizations
as you rightfully point out they have to
make sure that social distancing and
protecting of folks is happening we
started again largely overwhelmingly
because of mental health races we need
we needed to let people get out assuming
that they adhered and complied and
overwhelmingly they did other retail
other sort of releasing the steam
clearly on a list of considerations we
need to continue to see more progress on
the healthcare curves for us to take
more steps that's not to say that this
is a lifetime sentence it's not to say
it won't come at some point sooner than
later but we're just not there yet
unemployment the only thing I can say is
we're open overwhelmed the system the
entire state system crashed over the
weekend as we've already highlighted
we're gonna come back to you we would
really I think I want to speak for Judy
I'm gonna suggest Sunday Monday Tuesday
numbers on everything we report the
averaged right to says that something
was said before but particularly ed
would you agree that the Saturday
numbers have typically been been money
good because they're really data that
was collected on Friday the Sunday
Monday and Tuesday particularly with a
system crashing it adds to that the the
message I would say is we understand
your frustration stay at it we are
chopping through this we had a
roadblock taken away on the independent
contractors last week but by virtue of
catching up on the independent
contractor claims which had a big
backlog that a lot that didn't allow us
to get more aggressively with the
regular bread-and-butter claims that had
come in last week you then have the the
system go down but stay with it we
deeply appreciate your patience and know
that you will not lose one penny of
what's coming to you and that's probably
the most important thing to say thank
you
stir well do you have something no yep
you're good okay anybody I can't tell if
someone's behind you we're good okay
Matt we'll come to you good afternoon
related to unemployment governor thank
you answer part my question there but
our readers have been asking if you
would consider having somebody from the
Department of Labor attend these daily
briefings to give updates given the
backlog I'm curious if that's something
you've thought about just on schools
we've heard a lot from frustration from
parents and students and officials about
the time that it took to get to this I'm
just curious if you could tell us you
know why you waited to this point even
though it is before the May 15 deadline
given the frustration and on Saturday
commissioner
you said you plan to ask the National
Guard to help staff nursing homes could
you specify what steps have been taken
or what will be taken and the tasks that
the Guard will handle excuse me and when
they will arrive let me jump in on that
first and the the stuff and then as
usual throw it to you yeah we have had
the the Commissioner here before I gets
a good suggestion actually I'm not going
to guarantee it but --mine keep that
maybe get Rob to come in for at least a
cameo we've had him here before but I
think it's a it's a very fair one listen
we said this you know I think our first
deadline on schools was April 17 and the
pressure has been again I'm accepting
seniors and parents of athletes in many
cases in particular seniors who are
athletes I'm putting that group to one
side because there was a lot of vocal
and I think very well intentioned
pressure applied from them and I
completely get it I'm sitting next to
the dad of a
myself so understand it the pressure has
been far more on the other side to close
sooner than make the announcement to
close sooner than later and we took a
very simple and again we beat the
deadline we promise by 11 days I want
the I want that on the record as well
but we and the we is mostly you know
Lamont and his team our team Judy and
her team we took the decision that with
each passing week we're gonna know more
I mentioned this New York Times article
today these are the world's export
experts trying to figure out why
Singapore looks like it does and some
other place that feels like a lot like
Singapore doesn't and by the way in
Singapore Judy and you're pointed see so
I meant to say this a minute ago on
seasonal workers that's been a big
reason why they've had a flare-up for
that very reason getting that right
getting the testing right including
asymptomatic testing so frankly the
passage of time Matt gives us a lot more
information than we have you know I can
tell you right now three weeks from now
we're gonna know a lot more than we know
today and we this is an iterative it's a
war but it's an iterative war and
because it's an elusive enemy that we're
fighting someone you can't lay your eyes
on it makes it even more challenging I
want to say one thing in Judy can
correct the record when I say this too
there's a couple of different when you
think about augmenting staffing in
nursing homes one path that we're
pursuing is actually and you didn't ask
this but is the VA so the VA has made
some exceptions in in their deployment
clearly they're in in a big way in Menlo
Park and Paramus and God knows we needed
them but they have indicated in some
places in the country that they would
they were at least open-minded to surge
capacity in non veterans homes so that's
one thing that we are still working on
Judy I know if you see this differently
but the challenge with the National
guard is the following if you're a
medical if you're medically qualified in
the National Guard you're already being
you you're already working in your day
job somewhere so you've got to rob Peter
to pay Paul reality here so if you're
just say you're a nurse the chances are
if you're a nurse in New Jersey right
now in your day job the chances are
probably 100% unless you're quarantined
or god forbid unless there's a medical
reason you're already working fighting
covin so there is a robbing Peter to pay
Paul aspect here I think the piece that
we haven't spoken to is that there are
other members there are other yet again
a large population of members of the
guard who are not healthcare specific
who are not first responders who are not
already deployed in the kovat fight that
is the group that we are looking at
aggressively to take and deploy and do
non-medical stuff in our nursing homes
like cooking cleaning basic stuff that
doesn't rob Peter to pay Paul but at the
same time ads and augments to our staff
I didn't mean to go on so long but
anything you've got Judy on that you
said exactly what my first comment is
that the clinical people which is what
we need the most are are already called
up and working in hospitals so we're
asking for medical assistance and that
they would work under a registered nurse
or a licensed practical nurse helped
with site testing janitorial cooking
meal service family communication
administrative work security logistics
such as making sure the supplies and
equipment or where they need to be and
then general purpose so we've been on
the phone and working with the general
and his team all weekend and throughout
today so we hope to have something more
positive in the next several days but
they've been more than wanting to help
out it's just to make sure that we put
them in the right spots I don't want to
get your hopes too high on the VA front
but I just wanted to make sure I
distinguish the VA from the Nash
guard and that's something that we're
trying to run the traps on as we speak
at least you're gonna close us out good
afternoon good afternoon earlier you
said that layoffs are coming do you mean
that layoffs are a certainty or only if
relief isn't forthcoming via the cares
act and fed borrowing and my second
question is with the northeastern states
buying cooperative are you now setting
up a scenario where groups of states are
bidding against other groups of states
thank you thanks Elise and thanks to
each and every one of you for being
straightforward and brief with your
questions today again we have less time
on the clock layoffs mat will crumble
and they're already happening at
municipal levels so this is not a
theoretical argument and we can come
back to you with some of the communities
where we're seeing it but I think it's
going to be a question of scale whether
or not this is here and there or if this
is a massive across the board reality
and please God it is not that you know
we cannot fathom that this is the worst
healthcare crisis in our state's history
in our country's history the nine
million folks out there need more than
ever before firefighters health care
workers police EMTs
frontline essential workers we need them
more than ever before at the municipal
county state level the folks processing
unemployment it's unfathomable to think
of not just spotty reductions but if
that were to become broad scale and that
rests almost entirely and exclusively on
the combination of federal assistance
most importantly in size both
interpretation of the cares Act but much
you know in a bigger scale the next wave
as well as our ability to borrow I would
say on the buying cooperative I was very
I meant to say this earlier I'm glad you
raised it with the last question because
I realized I forgot to raise it myself
we were very happy yesterday I was very
happy to participate hosted by Governor
Cuomo with but with several other
governors that's already happening so
the notion of one one state
competing with another is the Kate
that's the case right now I think this
is a much more adult much more sensible
way to think about it we were having a
conversation today remember the sixth
leg of the road to recovery is
resiliency that includes everything from
addressing the racial and other
socio-economic inequities that this
viruses has torn open and allowed us
sadly to see in vivid detail but also to
the very specific cold-blooded
how many ventilators do we have in stock
etc and you can see the real potential
implications of a buying block that
includes the seven states that have been
aggregated in this Regional Council you
know that that aggregation of economic
clout probably I'm going to say with the
possible exception of California which
by the way if it were its own country
would be the fifth or sixth largest
economy in the world that buying power
that economic power would be you know
would rank five six seven in the world
and so using that to our advantage when
you sit across the table from
manufacturer X or Y that that to me
gives you an enormous leg up I'd say one
other thing I think it it without
question advances our ability to make
this stuff not just in the USA but to
make it in the region and I hope a lot
of it in New Jersey it's this this virus
has torn open the racial and other
inequities in our society for full view
it's also ripped off any masking of the
of the enormous Dimmu nishan of
manufacturing capacity in this country
and we're not immune to that New Jersey
is not immune you know when we say that
as we've said last week that gowns are
the new ventilators I think
folks can appreciate that a ventilator
well it may not be a an airplane it's
got a lot of moving parts but gowns for
crying out loud Judy we we there's no
there's no good answer to that and I
think this Regional Council gives us
also a leg up to say you know what let's
have a strategy to actually make this
stuff not just have a better negotiating
position but let's be more likely we can
make it I'm gonna mask up as I conclude
here I want to thank I forgot who gave
us to me but somebody sent this the
American flag masked to me which I wear
with great honor so we will be back
together tomorrow unless you hear
otherwise at 1:00 p.m.
in this room this is a big decision day
for us of this decision on on remote
learning and education for the balance
of the school year is a big one and it's
not one we take lightly and I want to
thank everybody beginning with the
Commissioner and Lamont to you and your
team Judy to you and Ed and your team
and the inputs that you gave and
obviously for your leadership generally
to the educators administrators moms and
dads kids others who weighed in this is
this is a tough decision but it's the
right decision I want to again thank
everybody for being so good this weekend
please keep that up you've been
extraordinary
the more we keep that up the more the
curves flatten the better and sooner we
can begin to really take the other steps
we need to take to reopen again Judy ed
Thank You Lamont to you Thank You
Colonel thank you as always
Jared Matt others thank you God bless
you all we'll see you back here at one
o'clock tomorrow